docs: Add guide on validating Actor input with Pydantic (#941)
apify/apify-sdk-python: docs/03_guides/11_pydantic.mdx

Keep the model's aliases in sync with the field keys in `input_schema.json`, and the two definitions describe the same input from both sides.

## Useful validation features

Pydantic offers much more than the example uses. A few features that come up often when validating Actor input:

**Format-validated types** for common string formats, for example `HttpUrl` for URLs or `EmailStr` for e-mail addresses (the latter needs the `pydantic[email]` extra):

<CodeBlock className="language-python">
    {HttpUrlExample}
</CodeBlock>

**Cross-field validation** with `model_validator`, when one field's validity depends on another:

<CodeBlock className="language-python">
    {ModelValidatorExample}
</CodeBlock>

> **Secret input fields.** The platform decrypts [secret input fields](https://docs.apify.com/platform/actors/development/secret-input) for you before <ApiLink to="class/Actor#get_input">`Actor.get_input`</ApiLink> returns, so you receive plaintext. Wrap such fields in Pydantic's `SecretStr` to keep them from leaking into logs or `model_dump()` output.

Reviewer: Maybe we can add an example using `SecretStr`?

---
id: input-validation
title: Input validation with Pydantic
description: Parse, validate, and type your Actor's input with Pydantic models instead of reaching into a raw dictionary.
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import RunnableCodeBlock from '@site/src/components/RunnableCodeBlock';
import ApiLink from '@theme/ApiLink';

import RawInputExample from '!!raw-loader!roa-loader!./code/11_raw_input.py';
import PydanticExample from '!!raw-loader!roa-loader!./code/11_pydantic.py';
import HttpUrlExample from '!!raw-loader!./code/11_http_url.py';
import ModelValidatorExample from '!!raw-loader!./code/11_model_validator.py';
import SecretStrExample from '!!raw-loader!./code/11_secret_str.py';

In this guide, you'll learn how to validate your Apify Actor's input with [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/), so that your code works with a typed, guaranteed-valid object instead of a raw dictionary.

## Introduction

> An Actor reads its input with <ApiLink to="class/Actor#get_input">`Actor.get_input`</ApiLink>, which returns the input record as a plain `dict` (or `None` when there's no input). Working with that dictionary directly is fragile:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An Actor reads its input with <ApiLink to="class/Actor#get_input">`Actor.get_input`</ApiLink>, which returns the input record as a plain `dict`. Working with that dictionary directly is fragile:
```
Since we're talking about working with dicts, no need to enlist all the possibilities.
Also, I think it's a good opportunity to update the reference documentation :D Right now there's no explanation, just `Returns [Any]`.

Author: > I think it's a good opportunity to update the reference documentation :D 

You mean the source code docstring or other part of the docs (maybe some page of the concepts part)? :)

Reviewer 2: I meant this linked ref doc: https://docs.apify.com/sdk/python/reference/class/Actor#get_input. So I assume I meant both doc and docstring, since it's autogenerated :D

Author: Well, the `get_input` docstring has been updated, and yes, the API reference docs have been generated. I was referring to the [Actor input](https://docs.apify.com/sdk/python/docs/concepts/actor-input) concept page, but if anything needs to be done there, it will be handled as part of https://github.com/apify/apify-sdk-python/pull/921.

So I'm merging this. Thank you for now :slightly_smiling_face:.

<RunnableCodeBlock className="language-python" language="python">
    {RawInputExample}
</RunnableCodeBlock>

> - There are no type guarantees. `max_results` could just as easily arrive as the string `"10"` or `None`, and you'd only find out when something blows up later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There are no type guarantees. `max_results` can arrive as the string `"10"` or `None` and you won't know until something breaks.
```

- There's no validation. Nothing stops `max_results` from being `0` or `-5`, or `search_terms` from being empty.

> - A typo in a key (`maxResult` instead of `maxResults`) silently falls back to the default instead of failing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A typo in a key, like `maxResult` instead of `maxResults`, silently falls back to the default instead of failing.
```

- Defaults are scattered across the codebase, and your editor can't autocomplete the fields or catch mistakes.

> [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/) solves all of this. You declare the shape of your input once as a model, and Pydantic parses the raw dictionary into a typed object, applying defaults, enforcing constraints, and producing clear error messages when the input doesn't match. Pydantic is already a dependency of the Apify SDK. There's nothing extra to install.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/) solves all of these problems. You declare the shape of your input once as a model, and Pydantic parses the raw dictionary into a typed object, applies defaults, enforces constraints, and produces clear error messages when the input doesn't match. 

Pydantic is already a dependency of the Apify SDK so you don't have to install anything.
```

## Example Actor

> The following Actor declares its input as a Pydantic `BaseModel`, validates the raw input against it, and then works with a fully typed object. On invalid input it fails fast with a readable error; on valid input it logs the normalized values and stores them as the Actor's output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following Actor declares its input as a Pydantic `BaseModel`, validates the raw input against it, and then works with a fully typed object. On invalid input it fails fast with a readable error. On valid input it logs the normalized values and stores them as the Actor's output.
```

<RunnableCodeBlock className="language-python" language="python">
    {PydanticExample}
</RunnableCodeBlock>

> Note about the **model**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### About the model
```

> - Apify input fields are conventionally `camelCase` (`maxResults`), while Python attributes are `snake_case` (`max_results`). Since every field follows that convention, `alias_generator=to_camel` derives the camelCase alias for the whole model at once, instead of spelling out `Field(alias=...)` on each field. `populate_by_name=True` lets the model accept either spelling, which is handy in tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Apify input fields conventionally use camel case (`maxResults`), while Python attributes use snake case (`max_results`). Since every field follows that convention, `alias_generator=to_camel` derives the camel ase alias for the whole model at once, instead of spelling out `Field(alias=...)` on each field. `populate_by_name=True` lets the model accept either spelling, which is handy in tests.
```

> - A field without a default (`search_terms`) is required; one with a default (`max_results`) is optional. There's a single, obvious place where every default lives.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A field without a default (`search_terms`) is required. A field with a default (`max_results`) is optional. There's a single, obvious place where every default lives.
```

- `ge=1, le=100` enforces a numeric range, `min_length=1` rejects an empty list, and `Literal['json', 'csv']` restricts a field to a fixed set of choices, mirroring an `enum` in the input schema.
- The `field_validator` normalizes the search terms (trimming whitespace, dropping empties) and rejects input that has nothing left. The rest of your code never has to repeat those checks.

> - `extra='ignore'` means adding a new field to your input schema won't break an older Actor build that doesn't know about it yet. Use `extra='forbid'` instead if you'd rather reject anything unexpected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `extra='ignore'` means adding a new field to your input schema won't break an older Actor build that doesn't know about it yet. Use `extra='forbid'` instead if you prefer to reject anything unexpected.
```

> And about the **validation** itself:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### About the validation
```

> - `model_validate` parses the raw dictionary into a typed `ActorInput` instance, filling in defaults and guaranteeing every field is valid, or raising a `ValidationError` describing every problem at once.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `model_validate` parses the raw dictionary into a typed `ActorInput` instance. It fills in defaults and guarantees every field is valid, or raises a `ValidationError` that describes every problem at once.
```

> - Catching that error, logging a readable summary, and re-raising makes the Actor **fail fast** with a clear explanation right at the start, rather than crashing with an obscure error somewhere deep in the run. Because the body runs inside `async with Actor:`, the re-raised exception automatically marks the run as `FAILED`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Catching that error, logging a readable summary, and re-raising makes the Actor fail fast with a clear explanation right at the start, rather than crashing with an obscure error somewhere deep in the run. Because the body runs inside `async with Actor:`, the re-raised exception automatically marks the run as `FAILED`.
```

- The error messages refer to the fields by their input-schema aliases. For invalid input like `{"searchTerms": [], "maxResults": 999, "outputFormat": "xml"}`, the log shows exactly what's wrong:

  ```text
  The Actor input is invalid:
  3 validation errors for ActorInput
  searchTerms
    List should have at least 1 item after validation, not 0 ...
  maxResults
    Input should be less than or equal to 100 ...
  outputFormat
    Input should be 'json' or 'csv' ...
  ```

Once validation passes, the rest of `main` works with `actor_input.search_terms`, `actor_input.max_results`, and `actor_input.output_format`, all correctly typed, with editor autocompletion and static type checking.

## Relationship to the input schema

> Pydantic validation **complements** the Actor's [input schema](https://docs.apify.com/platform/actors/development/input-schema) (`.actor/input_schema.json`). It doesn't replace it. The two serve different layers:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pydantic validation complements the Actor's [input schema](https://docs.apify.com/platform/actors/development/input-schema) (`.actor/input_schema.json`). It doesn't replace it. The two serve different layers:
```

> - The **input schema** drives the Apify Console form, documents the fields for your users, and lets the platform validate input before the run even starts. Keep declaring your fields there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The input schema drives the Apify Console form, documents the fields for your users, and lets the platform validate input before the run even starts. Keep declaring your fields there.
```

> - The **Pydantic model** validates the input again *inside your Python code*, where it gives you a typed object, IDE support, and richer rules (normalization, cross-field checks, custom formats) that the input schema can't express. It's also your safety net for runs started programmatically by [another Actor](../concepts/interacting-with-other-actors) or executed [locally](https://docs.apify.com/cli/docs/reference#apify-run), and for keeping the two definitions honest with each other.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The Pydantic model validates the input again inside your Python code, where it gives you a typed object, IDE support, and richer rules (normalization, cross-field checks, custom formats) that the input schema can't express. It's also your safety net for runs started programmatically by [another Actor](../concepts/interacting-with-other-actors) or executed [locally](https://docs.apify.com/cli/docs/reference#apify-run), and for keeping the two definitions honest with each other.
```

Keep the model's aliases in sync with the field keys in `input_schema.json`, and the two definitions describe the same input from both sides.

## Useful validation features

> Pydantic offers much more than the example uses. A few features that come up often when validating Actor input:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pydantic offers extra features for validating Actor input.
```

> **Format-validated types** for common string formats, for example `HttpUrl` for URLs or `EmailStr` for e-mail addresses (the latter needs the `pydantic[email]` extra):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Format-validated types

For common string formats, for example `HttpUrl` for URLs or `EmailStr` for e-mail addresses, use format validated types:
```
Can we also add an example for `EmailStr` in the code block instead of cramming the info into the brackets?

<CodeBlock className="language-python">
    {HttpUrlExample}
</CodeBlock>

> **Cross-field validation** with `model_validator`, when one field's validity depends on another:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Cross-field validation

When one field's validity depends on another, use `model_validator`:
```

<CodeBlock className="language-python">
    {ModelValidatorExample}
</CodeBlock>

> **Secret input fields.** The platform decrypts [secret input fields](https://docs.apify.com/platform/actors/development/secret-input) for you before <ApiLink to="class/Actor#get_input">`Actor.get_input`</ApiLink> returns, so you receive plaintext. Wrap such fields in Pydantic's `SecretStr` to keep them from leaking into logs or `model_dump()` output, and read the plaintext with `get_secret_value()` when you actually need it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Secret input fields

The platform decrypts [secret input fields](https://docs.apify.com/platform/actors/development/secret-input) for you before <ApiLink to="class/Actor#get_input">`Actor.get_input`</ApiLink> returns, so you receive plaintext. To keep them from leaking into logs or `model_dump()` output, wrap such fields in Pydantic's `SecretStr` and read the plaintext with `get_secret_value()` when you actually need it:
```

<CodeBlock className="language-python">
    {SecretStrExample}
</CodeBlock>

> For the full set of types, constraints, and validators, see the [Pydantic documentation](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/models/).

Reviewer 2: I'd move this sentence under "Useful validation features".

## Conclusion

> In this guide, you learned how to validate Actor input with Pydantic: declaring the input as a model with aliases, defaults, and constraints; parsing the raw input with `model_validate`; failing fast with a readable error when the input is invalid; and working with a typed object for the rest of the run. To get started with your own Actors, see the [Actor templates](https://apify.com/templates/categories/python). If you have questions or need assistance, feel free to reach out on our [GitHub](https://github.com/apify/apify-sdk-python) or join our [Discord community](https://discord.com/invite/jyEM2PRvMU). Happy validating!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this guide, you learned how to validate Actor input with Pydantic: declaring the input as a model with aliases, defaults, and constraints, parsing the raw input with `model_validate`, failing fast with a readable error when the input is invalid, and working with a typed object for the rest of the run. To get started with your own Actors, see the [Actor templates](https://apify.com/templates/categories/python). If you have questions or need assistance, feel free to reach out on our [GitHub](https://github.com/apify/apify-sdk-python) or join our [Discord community](https://discord.com/invite/jyEM2PRvMU). Happy validating!
```
